# 1914

Domain: general
Topic: 1914
Authority: reference
Trust score: 0.72
Source: Wikipedia full extract API
Source URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/1914
Last updated: 2026-05-20

## Summary

1914 (MCMXIV) was a common year starting on Thursday of the Gregorian calendar and a common year starting on Wednesday of the Julian calendar, the 1914th year of the Common Era (CE) and Anno Domini (AD) designations, the 914th  year of the 2nd millennium, the 14th  year of the 20th century, and the  5th   year of the 1910s decade. As of the start of 1914, the Gregorian calendar was 13 days ahead of the Julian calendar, which remained in localized use until 1923.  
This year saw the beginning of what became known as the First World War, after Archduke Franz Ferdinand of Austria, heir to the Austrian throne was assassinated by Serbian nationalist Gavrilo Princip. It also saw the first airline to provide scheduled regular commercial passenger services with heavier-than-air aircraft, with the St. Petersburg–Tampa Airboat Line.

## Events

- January 1 – The St. Petersburg–Tampa Airboat Line in the United States starts services between St. Petersburg and Tampa, Florida, becoming the first airline to provide scheduled regular commercial passenger services with heavier-than-air aircraft, with Tony Jannus (the first federally-licensed pilot) conveying passengers in a Benoist XIV flying boat. Abram C. Pheil, mayor of St. Petersburg, is the first airline passenger, and over 3,000 people witness the first departure.
- January 11
- The Sakurajima volcano in Japan begins to erupt, becoming effusive after a very large earthquake on January 13. The lava flow causes the island which it forms to be linked to the Ōsumi Peninsula.
- January 29 – Tsar Nicholas II of Russia dismisses his 4th Prime Minister, Vladimir Kokovtsov due to his "lack of control over the press", he is succeeded by Ivan Goremykin for his second term
- February 8 – The Luxembourg national football team has its first victory, beating France 5–4 in a friendly match, for the first time France failed to beat Luxembourg in football history until 2017.
- February 12 – In Washington, D.C., the first stone of the Lincoln Memorial is put into place.
- February 13 – Copyright: In New York City, the American Society of Composers, Authors and Publishers is established, to protect the copyrighted musical compositions of its members.
- February 17 – Karl Staaff steps down as Prime Minister of Sweden in the aftermath of the Courtyard Crisis. He is replaced by Hjalmar Hammarskjöld, father of Dag Hammarskjöld.
- February 26 – The ocean liner that will become HMHS Britannic, sister to the RMS Titanic, is launched at the Harland and Wolff shipyards in Belfast.
- February 28 – The Autonomous Republic of Northern Epirus is proclaimed by ethnic Greeks, in Northern Epirus.
- March 7 – Prince William of Wied arrives in Albania, to begin his reign.
- March 10 – Suffragette Mary Richardson damages Velázquez's painting Rokeby Venus in London's National Gallery, with a meat chopper.
- March 20
- March 27 – Belgian surgeon Albert Hustin makes the first successful non-direct blood transfusion, using anticoagulants.
- March 29 – Katherine Routledge and her husband arrive on Easter Island, to make the first true study of it (they depart in August 1915).
- April 4–September 27 – Komagata Maru incident: The SS Komagata Maru sails from India to Canada. Canadian regulations, designed to exclude Asian immigrants, prevent the boat from docking in Vancouver, and it is forced to return to Calcutta with all its passengers.
- April 9 – Tampico Affair: A misunderstanding involving United States Navy sailors in Mexico and army troops loyal to Mexican dictator Victoriano Huerta leads to a breakdown in diplomatic relations between the United States and Mexico.
- April 11 – Canadian Margaret C. MacDonald is appointed Matron-in-Chief of the Canadian Nursing service band, and becomes the first woman in the British Empire to reach the rank of major.
- April 14–18 – The first International Criminal Police Congress is held in Monaco; 24 countries are represented, including some from Asia, Europe, and the Americas; the Dean of the Paris Law School is president.
- April 20
- Colorado Coalfield War: Ludlow Massacre – The Colorado National Guard attacks a tent colony of 1,200 striking coal miners in Ludlow, Colorado, killing 21 people.
- April 21 – United States occupation of Veracruz: 2,300 U.S. Navy sailors and Marines from the South Atlantic fleet land in the port city of Veracruz, Mexico, which they will occupy for over six months. The Ypiranga incident occurs when they attempt to enforce an arms embargo against Mexico by preventing the German cargo steamer SS Ypiranga from unloading arms for the Mexican government in the port.
- April 22 – Mexico ends diplomatic relations with the United States for the time being.
- April 23
- April 24–25 – Larne Gun Running: 35,000 rifles and over 3 million rounds of ammunition from a German dealer are landed at Larne, Bangor and Donaghadee in Ulster for the Unionist Ulster Volunteers.
- May 1–November 1 – The Exposition Internationale is held at Lyon, France.
- May 5–October 11 – The Jubilee Exhibition (Jubilæumsutstillingen) is held at Kristiania, Norway, to mark the centennial of the country's constitution.
- May 8 – Paramount Pictures is created by W. W. Hodkinson as a national film distributor in the United States.
- May 9 – J. T. Hearne in England becomes the first bowler to take 3,000 first-class wickets.
- May 17 – The Protocol of Corfu provides for the provinces of Korçë and Gjirokastër, constituting Northern Epirus, to be granted autonomy under the nominal sovereignty of Albania.
- May 25 – The House of Commons of the United Kingdom passes the Government of Ireland Act 1914, the "Irish Home Rule Bill".
- May 29 – Ocean liner RMS Empress of Ireland sinks in the Gulf of St. Lawrence following a collision; 1,012 lives are lost.
- May 30 – Ocean liner RMS Aquitania makes her maiden voyage.
- c. June – Blaise Diagne of Senegal becomes the first Black African representative in the French Parliament.
- June 1 – Woodrow Wilson's envoy, Edward Mandell House, meets with Kaiser Wilhelm II.
- June 8 – The Brazilian Football Confederation is founded, with Álvaro Zamith as its first president. The Brazilian Olympic Committee is founded on the same day.
- June 9 – Pittsburgh Pirate Honus Wagner becomes the first baseball player in the twentieth century with 3,000 career hits.
- June 12–18 – Greek genocide: Ottoman Greeks in Phocaea are massacred by Turkish irregular troops.
- June 18 – Mexican Revolution: The Constitutionals take San Luis Potosí; Venustiano Carranza demands Victoriano Huerta's surrender.
- June 23 – After it had been closed so that it could be deepened, the Kaiser-Wilhelm-Kanal is reopened by the Kaiser; the British Fleet under Sir George Warrender visits; the Kaiser inspects the Dreadnought HMS King George V.
- June 24 – In Manchester, New Hampshire, a downtown fire causes $400,000 worth of damage and injures 19 firemen.
- June 28 – Assassination of Archduke Franz Ferdinand of Austria: Serbian nationalist Gavrilo Princip, 19, assassinates Archduke Franz Ferdinand of Austria and his wife, Duchess Sophie, in Sarajevo, Bosnia and Herzegovina, triggering the July Crisis overnight and eventually World War I. Anti-Serb riots in Sarajevo and Zagreb break out.
- June 29
- The Secretary of the Austro-Hungarian Legation at Belgrade sends a dispatch to Vienna, suggesting Serbian complicity in the crime of Sarajevo. Anti-Serb riots continue throughout Bosnia.
- The International Exhibition opens at the "White City", Ashton Gate, Bristol, England, U.K. It closes on August 15, and the site is used as a military depot.
- June 30 – Among those addressing the Parliament of the United Kingdom on the assassination of Archduke Franz Ferdinand are Lords Crewe and Lansdowne in the House of Lords, and Messrs Asquith and Law in the Commons.
- July 1 – The Royal Naval Air Service, a forerunner of the Royal Air Force, is established in the United Kingdom.
- July 2 – The German Kaiser announces that he will not attend the funeral of Archduke Franz Ferdinand.
- July 4
- The funeral of Archduke Franz Ferdinand of Austria takes place at Artstetten Castle, 50 miles west of Vienna, Austria-Hungary.
- July 5 – A council is held at Potsdam: powerful leaders within Austria-Hungary and Germany meet to discuss the possibilities of war with Serbia, Russia and France.
- July 7 – Austria-Hungary convenes a Council of Ministers, including Ministers for Foreign Affairs and War, the Chief of the General Staff, and Naval Commander-in-Chief; the Council lasts from 11:30 am until 6:15 pm.
- July 9 – The Emperor of Austria-Hungary receives the report of the Austro-Hungarian investigation into the assassination of Archduke Franz Ferdinand of Austria at Sarajevo. The Times of London publishes an account of the Austro-Hungarian press campaign against the Serbians (who are described as "pestilent rats").
- July 10 – Nicholas Hartwig, Russian Minister to Serbia, dies of a heart attack while visiting Austrian minister Wladimir Giesl von Gieslingen at the Austrian Legation in Belgrade.
- July 11
- USS Nevada, the United States Navy's first "super-dreadnought" battleship, is launched.
- Over 5,000 people attend a rally in Union Square, Manhattan, called by the Anti-Militarist League to commemorate the anarchists killed in the July 4th Lexington Avenue bombing.
- July 13 – Reports surface of a projected Serbian attack upon the Austro-Hungarian Legation at Belgrade.
- July 14 – The Government of Ireland Bill completes its passage through the House of Lords in the U.K. It allows Ulster counties to vote on whether or not they wish to participate in Home Rule from Dublin. Because of the outbreak of war in Europe and later developments in Ireland, the Act is never implemented in its original form.
- July 15 – Mexican Revolution: Victoriano Huerta resigns from the presidency of Mexico and leaves for Coatzacoalcos, Veracruz.
- July 18
- July 19 – George V summons a conference to discuss the Irish Home Rule problem. It meets from July 21–24, without reaching consensus.
- July 23 – July Ultimatum: Austria-Hungary presents Serbia with an unconditional ultimatum.
- July 25 – Serbia responds to the ultimatum from the 23rd accepting some but not all of Austria-Hungary's demands. In response Austria-Hungary severs diplomatic ties with Serbia and begins to mobilise its own forces. Radomir Putnik, Chief of the Serbian General Staff, is arrested in Budapest, but subsequently allowed to return to Serbia.
- July 26 – Howth gun-running: former British civil servant and novelist Erskine Childers and his wife Molly sail into Howth in Ireland in his yacht Asgard and land 2,500 guns for the nationalist Irish Volunteers from a German dealer. British Army troops of the King's Own Scottish Borderers, returning to Dublin having been called out to assist police in attempting to prevent the Volunteers from moving the arms to the city, perpetrate the Bachelor's Walk massacre, firing on a crowd of protestors at Bachelors Walk, killing three; a fourth man dies later from bayonet wounds and more than 37 others are injured.
- July 27 – Felix Ysagun Manalo registers the Iglesia ni Cristo (Church of Christ) with the government of the Philippines.
- July 28
- The official start of World War I when Austria-Hungary declares war on Serbia by telegram. Tsar Nicholas II of Russia orders a partial mobilization against Austria-Hungary.
- July 28–August 10 – World War I: Pursuit of Goeben and Breslau: British and French naval forces fail to prevent the ships of the Imperial German Navy Mediterranean Division from reaching the Dardanelles.
- July 29
- World War I: Austro-Hungarian Navy river monitor SMS Bodrog fires the first shots of the war, opening the bombardment of the defenses of Belgrade, Serbia's capital.
- July 31 – Russia orders full mobilisation.
- August 1
- August 2
- At 19:00 (local time) Germany issues a 12-hour ultimatum to neutral Belgium, to allow German passage into France.
- August 3
- At 07:00 (local time) Belgium declines to accept Germany's ultimatum of August 2.
- August 4
- World War I: German invasion of Belgium – At 08:02 (local time) Imperial German Army troops enter Belgium, bringing the July Crisis to a climax. At 23:00 (GMT) the British entry into World War I takes place when King George V in London declares war on Germany for this violation of Belgian neutrality (protected by the Treaty of London (1839)) and especially to defend France. This means a declaration of war by the whole British Empire against the German Empire. The United States declares neutrality.
- World War I: Imperial German Navy Rear-Admiral Wilhelm Souchon bombards the French Algerian ports of Bône and Philippeville from battlecruiser Goeben and light cruiser Breslau.
- August 5
- The Kingdom of Montenegro declares war on Austria-Hungary.
- August 5–16 – Battle of Liège: The German Army overruns and defeats the Belgians with the first operational use of Big Bertha.
- August 6 – World War I:
- Austria-Hungary declares war on Russia.
- August 7 – World War I:
- British colonial troops of the British Gold Coast Regiment, entering the German West African colony of Togoland, encounter the German-led police force at a factory in Nuatja, near Lomé, and the police open fire on the patrol. Alhaji Grunshi returns fire, the first soldier in British service to fire a shot in the war.
- August 8
- German colonial forces execute Martin-Paul Samba, for high treason.
- Sir Ernest Shackleton's Imperial Trans-Antarctic Expedition sets sail on the Endurance from Britain, in an attempt to cross Antarctica.
- August 9 – World War I: British Royal Navy light cruiser HMS Birmingham rams and sinks German submarine U-15 off Fair Isle, the first U-boat lost in action.
- August 12 – World War I:
- Formal declaration of war by the United Kingdom on Austria-Hungary.
- August 13 – The Teoloyucan Treaties are signed in the State of Mexico.
- August 15
- August 15–24 – World War I: Battle of Cer – Serbian troops defeat the Austro-Hungarian army, marking the first Entente victory of the War.
- August 16 – World War I:
- German warships SMS Goeben and Breslau (both commissioned in 1912), which reached Constantinople on August 10, are transferred to the Ottoman Navy, Goeben becoming its flagship, Yavuz Sultan Selim.
- August 17–September 2 – World War I: The Battle of Tannenberg begins between German and Russian forces.
- August 20
- August 22 – World War I: Battle of Rossignol – German forces decisively defeat the French.
- August 23 – World War I:
- Battle of Mons: In its first major action, the British Expeditionary Force holds the German forces but then begins a month-long fighting Great Retreat to the Marne.
- August 26 – World War I:
- August 26–27 – Battle of Le Cateau: British, French, and Belgian forces make a successful tactical retreat from the German advance.
- August 26–30 – Battle of Tannenberg: The Russian Second Army is surrounded and defeated.
- August 28 – Battle of Heligoland Bight: British cruisers under Admiral Beatty sink three German cruisers.
- August 29–30 – The Battle of St. Quentin: French forces hold back the German advance.
- September 1
- (August 19 Old Style) Saint Petersburg in Russia changes its name to Petrograd.
- September 2 – World War I: The French village of Moronvilliers is occupied by the Germans.
- September 3 – World War I:
- The Austro-Hungarian city and fortress of Lemberg falls to Russian troops.
- September 5 – World War I:
- The First Battle of the Marne begins: Situated north-east of Paris, the French 6th Army under General Maunoury attacks German forces near Paris. Over 2,000,000 fight (500,000 are killed/wounded) in the Allied victory. A French and British counterattack at the Marne ends the German advance on Paris.
- British Royal Navy scout cruiser HMS Pathfinder is sunk by German submarine U-21 in the Firth of Forth (Scotland), the first ship ever to be sunk by a locomotive torpedo fired from a submarine.
- September 6–8 – French Army troops are rushed from Paris to join the First Battle of the Marne using Renault Type AG taxicabs.
- September 7 – World War I: Turkey declares war on Belgium.
- September 10 – World War I: South Africa declares war on Germany.
- September 11 – World War I:
